<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<sd-line>In the Rectory garden next morning, with the sun shining from a cloudless sky. The garden wall has a five-barred wooden gate, wide enough to admit a carriage, in the middle. Beside the gate hangs a bell on a coiled spring, communicating with a pull outside. The carriage drive comes down the middle of the garden and then swerves to its left, where it ends in a little gravelled circus opposite the Rectory porch. Beyond the gate is seen the dusty high road, parallel with the wall, bounded on the farther side by a strip of turf and an unfenced pine wood. On the lawn, between the house and the drive, is a clipped yew tree, with a garden bench in its shade. On the opposite side the garden is shut in by a box hedge; and there is a little sundial on the turf, with an iron chair near it. A little path leads through the box hedge, behind the sundial.</sd-line>
			<sd-line>Frank, seated on the chair near the sundial, on which he has placed the morning paper, is reading The Standard. His father comes from the house, red-eyed and shivery, and meets Frank’s eye with misgiving.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Looking at his watch.</sd> Half-past eleven. Nice hour for a rector to come down to breakfast!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. Don’t mock, Frank: don’t mock. I am a little⁠—er⁠—<sd>Shivering</sd>⁠—</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Off color?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. <sd>repudiating the expression</sd> No, sir: <i>unwell</i> this morning. Where’s your mother?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Don’t be alarmed: she’s not here. Gone to town by the 11.13 with Bessie. She left several messages for you. Do you feel equal to receiving them now, or shall I wait til you’ve breakfasted?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. I <em>have</em> breakfasted, sir. I am surprised at your mother going to town when we have people staying with us. They’ll think it very strange.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Possibly she has considered that. At all events, if Crofts is going to stay here, and you are going to sit up every night with him until four, recalling the incidents of your fiery youth, it is clearly my mother’s duty, as a prudent housekeeper, to go up to the stores and order a barrel of whisky and a few hundred siphons.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. I did not observe that Sir George drank excessively.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>You were not in a condition to, gov’nor.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. Do you mean to say that <i>I</i>⁠—?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Calmly.</sd> I never saw a beneficed clergyman less sober. The anecdotes you told about your past career were so awful that I really don’t think Praed would have passed the night under your roof if it hadnt been for the way my mother and he took to one another.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. Nonsense, sir. I am Sir George Crofts’ host. I must talk to him about something; and he has only one subject. Where is Mr. Praed now?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>He is driving my mother and Bessie to the station.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. Is Crofts up yet?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, long ago. He hasn’t turned a hair: he’s in much better practice than you. Has kept it up ever since, probably. He’s taken himself off somewhere to smoke.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Frank resumes his paper. The parson turns disconsolately towards the gate; then comes back irresolutely.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. Er⁠—Frank.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Yes.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. Do you think the Warrens will expect to be asked here after yesterday afternoon?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Theyve been asked already.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. <sd>appalled</sd> What!!!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Crofts informed us at breakfast that you told him to bring Mrs. Warren and Vivie over here to-day, and to invite them to make this house their home. My mother then found she must go to town by the 11.13 train.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. <sd>with despairing vehemence</sd> I never gave any such invitation. I never thought of such a thing.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Compassionately.</sd> How do you know, gov’nor, what you said and thought last night?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Coming in through the hedge.</sd> Good morning.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. Good morning. I must apologize for not having met you at breakfast. I have a touch of⁠—of⁠—</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Clergyman’s sore throat, Praed. Fortunately not chronic.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Changing the subject.</sd> Well I must say your house is in a charming spot here. Really most charming.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. Yes: it is indeed. Frank will take you for a walk, Mr. Praed, if you like. I’ll ask you to excuse me: I must take the opportunity to write my sermon while Mrs. Gardner is away and you are all amusing yourselves. You won’t mind, will you?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Certainly not. Don’t stand on the slightest ceremony with me.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. Thank you. I’ll⁠—er⁠—er⁠—<sd>He stammers his way to the porch and vanishes into the house.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Curious thing it must be writing a sermon every week.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Ever so curious, if he did it. He buys em. He’s gone for some soda water.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>My dear boy: I wish you would be more respectful to your father. You know you can be so nice when you like.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>My dear Praddy: you forget that I have to live with the governor. When two people live together⁠—it don’t matter whether theyre father and son or husband and wife or brother and sister⁠—they can’t keep up the polite humbug thats so easy for ten minutes on an afternoon call. Now the governor, who unites to many admirable domestic qualities the irresoluteness of a sheep and the pompousness and aggressiveness of a jackass⁠—</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>No, pray, pray, my dear Frank, remember! He is your father.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>I give him due credit for that. <sd>Rising and flinging down his paper</sd> But just imagine his telling Crofts to bring the Warrens over here! He must have been ever so drunk. You know, my dear Praddy, my mother wouldn’t stand Mrs. Warren for a moment. Vivie mustn’t come here until she’s gone back to town.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>But your mother doesn’t know anything about Mrs. Warren, does she? <sd>He picks up the paper and sits down to read it.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>I don’t know. Her journey to town looks as if she did. Not that my mother would mind in the ordinary way: she has stuck like a brick to lots of women who had got into trouble. But they were all nice women. Thats what makes the real difference. Mrs. Warren, no doubt, has her merits; but she’s ever so rowdy; and my mother simply wouldn’t put up with her. So⁠—hallo! <sd>This exclamation is provoked by the reappearance of the clergyman, who comes out of the house in haste and dismay.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. Frank: Mrs. Warren and her daughter are coming across the heath with Crofts: I saw them from the study windows. What <i>am</i> I to say about your mother?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Stick on your hat and go out and say how delighted you are to see them; and that Frank’s in the garden; and that mother and Bessie have been called to the bedside of a sick relative, and were ever so sorry they couldn’t stop; and that you hope Mrs. Warren slept well; and⁠—and⁠—say any blessed thing except the truth, and leave the rest to Providence.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. But how are we to get rid of them afterwards?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Theres no time to think of that now. Here! <sd>He bounds into the house.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. He’s so impetuous. I don’t know what to do with him, Mr. Praed.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Returning with a clerical felt hat, which he claps on his father’s head.</sd> Now: off with you. <sd>Rushing him through the gate.</sd> Praed and I’ll wait here, to give the thing an unpremeditated air. <sd>The clergyman, dazed but obedient, hurries off.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>We must get the old girl back to town somehow, Praed. Come! Honestly, dear Praddy, do you like seeing them together?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, why not?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>His teeth on edge.</sd> Don’t it make your flesh creep ever so little? that wicked old devil, up to every villainy under the sun, I’ll swear, and Vivie⁠—ugh!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Hush, pray. Theyre coming.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>The clergyman and Crofts are seen coming along the road, followed by Mrs. Warren and Vivie walking affectionately together.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Look: she actually has her arm round the old woman’s waist. It’s her right arm: she began it. She’s gone sentimental, by God! Ugh! ugh! Now do you feel the creeps? <sd>The clergyman opens the gate: and Mrs. Warren and Vivie pass him and stand in the middle of the garden looking at the house. Frank, in an ecstasy of dissimulation, turns gaily to Mrs. Warren, exclaiming</sd> Ever so delighted to see you, Mrs. Warren. This quiet old rectory garden becomes you perfectly.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>Well, I never! Did you hear that, George? He says I look well in a quiet old rectory garden.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. <sd>still holding the gate for Crofts, who loafs through it, heavily bored</sd> You look well everywhere, Mrs. Warren.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Bravo, gov’nor! Now look here: lets have a treat before lunch. First lets see the church. Everyone has to do that. It’s a regular old thirteenth century church, you know: the gov’nor’s ever so fond of it, because he got up a restoration fund and had it completely rebuilt six years ago. Praed will be able to shew its points.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Rising.</sd> Certainly, if the restoration has left any to shew.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. <sd>mooning hospitably at them</sd> I shall be pleased, I’m sure, if Sir George and Mrs. Warren really care about it.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, come along and get it over.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Turning back toward the gate.</sd> I’ve no objection.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Rev</speaker>
				<speech>S. Not that way. We go through the fields, if you don’t mind. Round here. <sd>He leads the way by the little path through the box hedge.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, all right. <sd>He goes with the parson.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Praed follows with Mrs. Warren. Vivie does not stir: she watches them until they have gone, with all the lines of purpose in her face marking it strongly.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Ain’t you coming?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>No. I want to give you a warning, Frank. You were making fun of my mother just now when you said that about the rectory garden. That is barred in the future. Please treat my mother with as much respect as you treat your own.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>My dear Viv: she wouldn’t appreciate it: the two cases require different treatment. But what on earth has happened to you? Last night we were perfectly agreed as to your mother and her set. This morning I find you attitudinizing sentimentally with your arm around your parent’s waist.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Flushing.</sd> Attitudinizing!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>That was how it struck me. First time I ever saw you do a second-rate thing.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Controlling herself.</sd> Yes, Frank: there has been a change: but I don’t think it a change for the worse. Yesterday I was a little prig.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>And today?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Wincing; then looking at him steadily.</sd> Today I know my mother better than you do.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Heaven forbid!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>What do you mean?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Viv: theres a freemasonry among thoroughly immoral people that you know nothing of. You’ve too much character. <i>That’s</i> the bond between your mother and me: that’s why I know her better than youll ever know her.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>You are wrong: you know nothing about her. If you knew the circumstances against which my mother had to struggle⁠—</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Adroitly finishing the sentence for her.</sd> I should know why she is what she is, shouldn’t I? What difference would that make? Circumstances or no circumstances, Viv, you won’t be able to stand your mother.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Very angry.</sd> Why not?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Because she’s an old wretch, Viv. If you ever put your arm around her waist in my presence again, I’ll shoot myself there and then as a protest against an exhibition which revolts me.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Must I choose between dropping your acquaintance and dropping my mother’s?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Gracefully.</sd> That would put the old lady at ever such a disadvantage. No, Viv: your infatuated little boy will have to stick to you in any case. But he’s all the more anxious that you shouldn’t make mistakes. It’s no use, Viv: your mother’s impossible. She may be a good sort; but she’s a bad lot, a very bad lot.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Hotly.</sd> Frank⁠—! <sd>He stands his ground. She turns away and sits down on the bench under the yew tree, struggling to recover her self-command. Then she says</sd> Is she to be deserted by the world because she’s what you call a bad lot? Has she no right to live?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>No fear of that, Viv: <i>she</i> won’t ever be deserted. <sd>He sits on the bench beside her.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>But I am to desert her, I suppose.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Babyishly, lulling her and making love to her with his voice.</sd> Mustn’t go live with her. Little family group of mother and daughter wouldn’t be a success. Spoil <em>our</em> little group.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Falling under the spell.</sd> What little group?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>The babes in the wood: Vivie and little Frank. <sd>He nestles against her like a weary child.</sd> Lets go and get covered up with leaves.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Rhythmically, rocking him like a nurse.</sd> Fast asleep, hand in hand, under the trees.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>The wise little girl with her silly little boy.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>The dear little boy with his dowdy little girl.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Ever so peaceful, and relieved from the imbecility of the little boy’s father and the questionableness of the little girl’s⁠—</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Smothering the word against her breast</sd> Sh-sh-sh-sh! little girl wants to forget all about her mother. <sd>They are silent for some moments, rocking one another. Then Vivie wakes up with a shock, exclaiming</sd> What a pair of fools we are! Come: sit up. Gracious! your hair. <sd>She smooths it.</sd> I wonder do all grown up people play in that childish way when nobody is looking. I never did it when I was a child.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Neither did I. You are my first playmate. <sd>He catches her hand to kiss it, but checks himself to look around first. Very unexpectedly, he sees Crofts emerging from the box hedge.</sd> Oh damn!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Why damn, dear?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Whispering</sd> Sh! Here’s this brute Crofts. <sd>He sits farther away from her with an unconcerned air.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Could I have a few words with you, Miss Vivie?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Certainly.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>To Frank.</sd> Youll excuse me, Gardner. Theyre waiting for you in the church, if you don’t mind.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Rising</sd> Anything to oblige you, Crofts⁠—except church. If you should happen to want me, Vivvums, ring the gate bell. <sd>He goes into the house with unruffled suavity.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Watching him with a crafty air as he disappears, and speaking to Vivie with an assumption of being on privileged terms with her.</sd> Pleasant young fellow that, Miss Vivie. Pity he has no money, isn’t it?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Do you think so?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Well, whats he to do? No profession. No property. Whats he good for?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I realize his disadvantages, Sir George.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>A little taken aback at being so precisely interpreted</sd> Oh, it’s not that. But while we’re in this world we’re in it; and money’s money. <sd>Vivie does not answer.</sd> Nice day, isn’t it?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>With scarcely veiled contempt for this effort at conversation.</sd> Very.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>With brutal good humor, as if he liked her pluck.</sd> Well thats not what I came to say. <sd>Sitting down beside her</sd> Now listen, Miss Vivie. I’m quite aware that I’m not a young lady’s man.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Indeed, Sir George?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>No; and to tell you the honest truth I don’t want to be either. But when I say a thing I mean it; and when I feel a sentiment I feel it in earnest; and what I value I pay hard money for. Thats the sort of man I am.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>It does you great credit, I’m sure.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, I don’t mean to praise myself. I have my faults, Heaven knows: no man is more sensible of that than I am. I know I’m not perfect: thats one of the advantages of being a middle-aged man; for I’m not a young man, and I know it. But my code is a simple one, and, I think, a good one. Honor between man and man; fidelity between man and woman; and no can’t about this religion or that religion, but an honest belief that things are making for good on the whole.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>With biting irony.</sd> “A power, not ourselves, that makes for righteousness,” eh?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Taking her seriously.</sd> Oh certainly. Not ourselves, of course. Y o u understand what I mean. Well, now as to practical matters. You may have an idea that I’ve flung my money about; but I havn’t: I’m richer today than when I first came into the property. I’ve used my knowledge of the world to invest my money in ways that other men have overlooked; and whatever else I may be, I’m a safe man from the money point of view.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>It’s very kind of you to tell me all this.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Oh well, come, Miss Vivie: you needn’t pretend you don’t see what I’m driving at. I want to settle down with a Lady Crofts. I suppose you think me very blunt, eh?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Not at all: I am very much obliged to you for being so definite and business-like. I quite appreciate the offer: the money, the position, <i>Lady Crofts</i>, and so on. But I think I will say no, if you don’t mind, I’d rather not. <sd>She rises, and strolls across to the sundial to get out of his immediate neighborhood.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Not at all discouraged, and taking advantage of the additional room left him on the seat to spread himself comfortably, as if a few preliminary refusals were part of the inevitable routine of courtship.</sd> I’m in no hurry. It was only just to let you know in case young Gardner should try to trap you. Leave the question open.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Sharply.</sd> My no is final. I won’t go back from it.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Crofts is not impressed. He grins; leans forward with his elbows on his knees to prod with his stick at some unfortunate insect in the grass; and looks cunningly at her. She turns away impatiently.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>I’m a good deal older than you. Twenty-five years: quarter of a century. I shan’t live for ever; and I’ll take care that you shall be well off when I’m gone.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I am proof against even that inducement, Sir George. Don’t you think youd better take your answer? There is not the slightest chance of my altering it.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Rising, after a final slash at a daisy, and coming nearer to her.</sd> Well, no matter. I could tell you some things that would change your mind fast enough; but I wont, because I’d rather win you by honest affection. I was a good friend to your mother: ask her whether I wasn’t. She’d never have make the money that paid for your education if it hadnt been for my advice and help, not to mention the money I advanced her. There are not many men who would have stood by her as I have. I put not less than forty thousand pounds into it, from first to last.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Staring at him.</sd> Do you mean to say that you were my mother’s business partner?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Yes. Now just think of all the trouble and the explanations it would save if we were to keep the whole thing in the family, so to speak. Ask your mother whether she’d like to have to explain all her affairs to a perfect stranger.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I see no difficulty, since I understand that the business is wound up, and the money invested.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Stopping short, amazed.</sd> Wound up! Wind up a business thats paying 35 per cent in the worst years! Not likely. Who told you that?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Her color quite gone</sd> Do you mean that it is still⁠—? <sd>She stops abruptly, and puts her hand on the sundial to support herself. Then she gets quickly to the iron chair and sits down.</sd> What business are you talking about?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Well, the fact is it’s not what would considered exactly a high-class business in my set⁠—the country set, you know⁠—<em>our</em> set it will be if you think better of my offer. Not that theres any mystery about it: don’t think that. Of course you know by your mother’s being in it that it’s perfectly straight and honest. I’ve known her for many years; and I can say of her that she’d cut off her hands sooner than touch anything that was not what it ought to be. I’ll tell you all about it if you like. I don’t know whether you’ve found in travelling how hard it is to find a really comfortable private hotel.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Sickened, averting her face.</sd> Yes: go on.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Well, thats all it is. Your mother has got a genius for managing such things. We’ve got two in Brussels, one in Ostend, one in Vienna, and two in Budapest. Of course there are others besides ourselves in it; but we hold most of the capital; and your mother’s indispensable as managing director. You’ve noticed, I daresay, that she travels a good deal. But you see you can’t mention such things in society. Once let out the word hotel and everybody thinks you keep a public-house. You wouldn’t like people to say that of your mother, would you? Thats why we’re so reserved about it. By the way, youll keep it to yourself, won’t you? Since it’s been a secret so long, it had better remain so.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>And this is the business you invite me to join you in?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Oh no. My wife shan’t be troubled with business. Youll not be in it more than you’ve always been.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><i>I</i> always been! What do you mean?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Only that you’ve always lived on it. It paid for your education and the dress you have on your back. Don’t turn up your nose at business, Miss Vivie: where would your Newnhams and Girtons be without it?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Rising, almost beside herself.</sd> Take care. I know what this business is.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Starting, with a suppressed oath.</sd> Who told you?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Your partner. My mother.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Black with rage.</sd> The old⁠—</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Just so.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>He swallows the epithet and stands for a moment swearing and raging foully to himself. But he knows that his cue is to be sympathetic. He takes refuge in generous indignation.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>She ought to have had more consideration for you. <i>I’d</i> never have told you.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I think you would probably have told me when we were married: it would have been a convenient weapon to break me in with.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Quite sincerely.</sd> I never intended that. On my word as a gentleman I didn’t.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Vivie wonders at him. Her sense of the irony of his protest cools and braces her. She replies with contemptuous self-possession.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>It does not matter. I suppose you understand that when we leave here today our acquaintance ceases.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Why? Is it for helping your mother?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>My mother was a very poor woman who had no reasonable choice but to do as she did. You were a rich gentleman; and you did the same for the sake of 35 per cent. You are a pretty common sort of scoundrel, I think. That is my opinion of you.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>After a stare: not at all displeased, and much more at his ease on these frank terms than on their former ceremonious ones.</sd> Ha! ha! ha! ha! Go it, little missie, go it: it doesn’t hurt me and it amuses you. Why the devil shouldn’t I invest my money that way? I take the interest on my capital like other people: I hope you don’t think I dirty my own hands with the work. Come! you wouldn’t refuse the acquaintance of my mother’s cousin the Duke of Belgravia because some of the rents he gets are earned in queer ways. You wouldn’t cut the Archbishop of Canterbury, I suppose, because the Ecclesiastical Commissioners have a few publicans and sinners among their tenants. Do you remember your Crofts scholarship at Newnham? Well, that was founded by my brother the M.P. He gets his 22 per cent out of a factory with 600 girls in it, and not one of them getting wages enough to live on. How d’ye suppose they manage when they have no family to fall back on? Ask your mother. And do you expect me to turn my back on 35 per cent when all the rest are pocketing what they can, like sensible men? No such fool! If youre going to pick and choose your acquaintances on moral principles, youd better clear out of this country, unless you want to cut yourself out of all decent society.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Conscience stricken.</sd> You might go on to point out that I myself never asked where the money I spent came from. I believe I am just as bad as you.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Greatly reassured.</sd> Of course you are; and a very good thing too! What harm does it do after all? <sd>Rallying her jocularly</sd> So you don’t think me such a scoundrel now you come to think it over. Eh?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I have shared profits with you: and I admitted you just now to the familiarity of knowing what I think of you.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>With serious friendliness.</sd> To be sure you did. You won’t find me a bad sort: I don’t go in for being superfine intellectually; but Ive plenty of honest human feeling; and the old Crofts breed comes out in a sort of instinctive hatred of anything low, in which I’m sure youll sympathize with me. Believe me, Miss Vivie, the world isn’t such a bad place as the croakers make out. As long as you don’t fly openly in the face of society, society doesn’t ask any inconvenient questions; and it makes precious short work of the cads who do. There are no secrets better kept than the secrets everybody guesses. In the class of people I can introduce you to, no lady or gentleman would so far forget themselves as to discuss my business affairs or your mothers. No man can offer you a safer position.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Studying him curiously.</sd> I suppose you really think youre getting on famously with me.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Well, I hope I may flatter myself that you think better of me than you did at first.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Quietly.</sd> I hardly find you worth thinking about at all now. When I think of the society that tolerates you, and the laws that protect you! when I think of how helpless nine out of ten young girls would be in the hands of you and my mother! the unmentionable woman and her capitalist bully⁠—</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Livid.</sd> Damn you!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>You need not. I feel among the damned already.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>She raises the latch of the gate to open it and go out. He follows her and puts his hand heavily on the top bar to prevent its opening.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Panting with fury.</sd> Do you think I’ll put up with this from you, you young devil?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Unmoved</sd> Be quiet. Some one will answer the bell. <sd>Without flinching a step she strikes the bell with the back of her hand. It clangs harshly; and he starts back involuntarily. Almost immediately Frank appears at the porch with his rifle.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>With cheerful politeness.</sd> Will you have the rifle, Viv; or shall I operate?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Frank: have you been listening?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Coming down into the garden.</sd> Only for the bell, I assure you; so that you shouldn’t have to wait. I think I shewed great insight into your character, Crofts.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>For two pins I’d take that gun from you and break it across your head.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Stalking him cautiously.</sd> Pray don’t. I’m ever so careless in handling firearms. Sure to be a fatal accident, with a reprimand from the coroner’s jury for my negligence.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Put the rifle away, Frank: it’s quite unnecessary.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Quite right, Viv. Much more sportsmanlike to catch him in a trap. <sd>Crofts, understanding the insult, makes a threatening movement.</sd> Crofts: there are fifteen cartridges in the magazine here; and I am a dead shot at the present distance and at an object of your size.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, you needn’t be afraid. I’m not going to touch you.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Ever so magnanimous of you under the circumstances! Thank you.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Crofts</speaker>
				<speech>I’ll just tell you this before I go. It may interest you, since youre so fond of one another. Allow me, Mister Frank, to introduce you to your half-sister, the eldest daughter of the Reverend Samuel Gardner. Miss Vivie: you half-brother. Good morning! <sd>He goes out through the gate and along the road.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>After a pause of stupefaction, raising the rifle</sd> Youll testify before the coroner that it’s an accident, Viv. <sd>He takes aim at the retreating figure of Crofts. Vivie seizes the muzzle and pulls it round against her breast.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Fire now. You may.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Dropping his end of the rifle hastily</sd> Stop! take care. <sd>She lets it go. It falls on the turf.</sd> Oh, you’ve given your little boy such a turn. Suppose it had gone off! ugh! <sd>He sinks on the garden seat, overcome.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Suppose it had: do you think it would not have been a relief to have some sharp physical pain tearing through me?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Coaxingly</sd> Take it ever so easy, dear Viv. Remember: even if the rifle scared that fellow into telling the truth for the first time in his life, that only makes us the babes in the woods in earnest. <sd>He holds out his arms to her.</sd> Come and be covered up with leaves again.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>With a cry of disgust.</sd> Ah, not that, not that. You make all my flesh creep.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Why, whats the matter?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Goodbye. <sd>She makes for the gate.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Jumping up.</sd> Hallo! Stop! Viv! Viv! <sd>She turns in the gateway</sd> Where are you going to? Where shall we find you?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>At Honoria Fraser’s chambers, 67 Chancery Lane, for the rest of my life. <sd>She goes off quickly in the opposite direction to that taken by Crofts.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>But I say⁠—wait⁠—dash it! <sd>He runs after her.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<h2>Act IV</h2>
			<sd-line>Honoria Fraser’s chambers in Chancery Lane. An office at the top of New Stone Buildings, with a plate-glass window, distempered walls, electric light, and a patent stove. Saturday afternoon. The chimneys of Lincoln’s Inn and the western sky beyond are seen through the window. There is a double writing table in the middle of the room, with a cigar box, ash pans, and a portable electric reading lamp almost snowed up in heaps of papers and books. This table has knee holes and chairs right and left and is very untidy. The clerk’s desk, closed and tidy, with its high stool, is against the wall, near a door communicating with the inner rooms. In the opposite wall is the door leading to the public corridor. Its upper panel is of opaque glass, lettered in black on the outside, Fraser and Warren. A baize screen hides the corner between this door and the window.</sd-line>
			<sd-line>Frank, in a fashionable light-colored coaching suit, with his stick, gloves, and white hat in his hands, is pacing up and down in the office. Somebody tries the door with a key.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Calling.</sd> Come in. It’s not locked.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Vivie comes in, in her hat and jacket. She stops and stares at him.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Sternly.</sd> What are you doing here?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Waiting to see you. I’ve been here for hours. Is this the way you attend to your business? <sd>He puts his hat and stick on the table, and perches himself with a vault on the clerk’s stool, looking at her with every appearance of being in a specially restless, teasing, flippant mood.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I’ve been away exactly twenty minutes for a cup of tea. <sd>She takes off her hat and jacket and hangs them behind the screen.</sd> How did you get in?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>The staff had not left when I arrived. He’s gone to play cricket on Primrose Hill. Why don’t you employ a woman, and give your sex a chance?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>What have you come for?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Springing off the stool and coming close to her.</sd> Viv: lets go and enjoy the Saturday half-holiday somewhere, like the staff. What do you say to Richmond, and then a music hall, and a jolly supper?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Can’t afford it. I shall put in another six hours work before I go to bed.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Can’t afford it, can’t we? Aha! Look here. <sd>He takes out a handful of sovereigns and makes them chink.</sd> Gold, Viv: gold!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Where did you get it?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Gambling, Viv: gambling. Poker.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Pah! It’s meaner than stealing it. No: I’m not coming. <sd>She sits down to work at the table, with her back to the glass door, and begins turning over the papers.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Remonstrating piteously.</sd> But, my dear Viv, I want to talk to you ever so seriously.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Very well: sit down in Honoria’s chair and talk here. I like ten minutes chat after tea. <sd>He murmurs.</sd> No use groaning: I’m inexorable. <sd>He takes the opposite seat disconsolately.</sd> Pass that cigar box, will you?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Pushing the cigar box across.</sd> Nasty womanly habit. Nice men don’t do it any longer.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Yes: they object to the smell in the office; and we’ve had to take to cigarets. See! <sd>She opens the box and takes out a cigaret, which she lights. She offers him one; but he shakes his head with a wry face. She settles herself comfortably in her chair, smoking.</sd> Go ahead.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Well, I want to know what you’ve done⁠—what arrangements you’ve made.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Everything was settled twenty minutes after I arrived here. Honoria has found the business too much for her this year; and she was on the point of sending for me and proposing a partnership when I walked in and told her I hadn’t a farthing in the world. So I installed myself and packed her off for a fortnight’s holiday. What happened at Haslemere when I left?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Nothing at all. I said youd gone to town on particular business.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Well?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Well, either they were too flabbergasted to say anything, or else Crofts had prepared your mother. Anyhow, she didn’t say anything; and Crofts didn’t say anything; and Praddy only stared. After tea they got up and went; and I’ve not seen them since.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Nodding placidly with one eye on a wreath of smoke.</sd> Thats all right.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Looking round disparagingly.</sd> Do you intend to stick in this confounded place?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Blowing the wreath decisively away, and sitting straight up.</sd> Yes. These two days have given me back all my strength and self-possession. I will never take a holiday again as long as I live.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>With a very wry face.</sd> Mps! You look quite happy. And as hard as nails.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Grimly.</sd> Well for me that I am!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Rising</sd> Look here, Viv: we must have an explanation. We parted the other day under a complete misunderstanding. <sd>He sits on the table, close to her.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Putting away the cigaret.</sd> Well: clear it up.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>You remember what Crofts said.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Yes.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>That revelation was supposed to bring about a complete change in the nature of our feeling for one another. It placed us on the footing of brother and sister.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Yes.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Have you ever had a brother?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>No.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Then you don’t know what being brother and sister feels like? Now I have lots of sisters; and the fraternal feeling is quite familiar to me. I assure you my feeling for you is not the least in the world like it. The girls will go <i>their</i> way; I will go mine; and we shan’t care if we never see one another again. Thats brother and sister. But as to you, I can’t be easy if I have to pass a week without seeing you. Thats not brother and sister. Its exactly what I felt an hour before Crofts made his revelation. In short, dear Viv, it’s love’s young dream.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Bitingly.</sd> The same feeling, Frank, that brought your father to my mother’s feet. Is that it?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>So revolted that he slips off the table for a moment.</sd> I very strongly object, Viv, to have my feelings compared to any which the Reverend Samuel is capable of harboring; and I object still more to a comparison of you to your mother. <sd>Resuming his perch</sd> Besides, I don’t believe the story. I have taxed my father with it, and obtained from him what I consider tantamount to a denial.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>What did he say?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>He said he was sure there must be some mistake.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Do you believe him?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>I am prepared to take his word against Crofts’.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Does it make any difference? I mean in your imagination or conscience; for of course it makes no real difference.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Shaking his head.</sd> None whatever to <i>me</i>.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Nor to me.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Staring</sd> But this is ever so surprising! <sd>He goes back to his chair.</sd> I thought our whole relations were altered in your imagination and conscience, as you put it, the moment those words were out of that brute’s muzzle.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>No: it was not that. I didn’t believe him. I only wish I could.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Eh?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I think brother and sister would be a very suitable relation for us.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>You really mean that?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Yes. It’s the only relation I care for, even if we could afford any other. I mean that.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Raising his eyebrows like one on whom a new light has dawned, and rising with quite an effusion of chivalrous sentiment.</sd> My dear Viv: why didn’t you say so before? I am ever so sorry for persecuting you. I understand, of course.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Puzzled.</sd> Understand what?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, I’m not a fool in the ordinary sense: only in the Scriptural sense of doing all the things the wise man declared to be folly, after trying them himself on the most extensive scale. I see I am no longer Vivvums’s little boy. Don’t be alarmed: I shall never call you Vivvums again⁠—at least unless you get tired of your new little boy, whoever he may be.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>My new little boy!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>With conviction.</sd> Must be a new little boy. Always happens that way. No other way, in fact.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>None that you know of, fortunately for you.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Someone knocks at the door.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>My curse upon yon caller, whoe’er he be!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>It’s Praed. He’s going to Italy and wants to say goodbye. I asked him to call this afternoon. Go and let him in.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>We can continue our conversation after his departure for Italy. I’ll stay him out. <sd>He goes to the door and opens it.</sd> How are you, Praddy? Delighted to see you. Come in.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Praed, dressed for travelling, comes in, in high spirits.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>How do you do, Miss Warren? <sd>She presses his hand cordially, though a certain sentimentality in his high spirits jars upon her.</sd> I start in an hour from Holborn Viaduct. I wish I could persuade you to try Italy.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>What for?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Why, to saturate yourself with beauty and romance, of course.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Vivie, with a shudder, turns her chair to the table, as if the work waiting for her there were a support to her. Praed sits opposite to her. Frank places a chair near Vivie, and drops lazily and carelessly into it, talking at her over his shoulder.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>No use, Praddy. Viv is a little Philistine. She is indifferent to<i>my</i> romance, and insensible to <i>my</i> beauty.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Mr. Praed: once for all, there is no beauty and no romance in life for me. Life is what it is; and I am prepared to take it as it is.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Enthusiastically.</sd> You will not say that if you come with me to Verona and on to Venice. You will cry with delight at living in such a beautiful world.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>This is most eloquent, Praddy. Keep it up.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, I assure you <i>I</i> have cried⁠—I shall cry again, I hope⁠—at fifty! At your age, Miss Warren, you would not need to go so far as Verona. Your spirits would absolutely fly up at the mere sight of Ostend. You would be charmed with the gaiety, the vivacity, the happy air of Brussels.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Springing up with an exclamation of loathing.</sd> Agh!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Rising.</sd> Whats the matter?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Rising.</sd> Hallo, Viv!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>To Praed, with deep reproach.</sd> Can you find no better example of your beauty and romance than Brussels to talk to me about?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Puzzled.</sd> Of course it’s very different from Verona. I don’t suggest for a moment that⁠—</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Bitterly.</sd> Probably the beauty and romance come to much the same in both places.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Completely sobered and much concerned.</sd> My dear Miss Warren: I⁠—<sd>looking enquiringly at Frank</sd> Is anything the matter?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>She thinks your enthusiasm frivolous, Praddy. She’s had ever such a serious call.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Sharply.</sd> Hold your tongue, Frank. Don’t be silly.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Sitting down.</sd> Do you call this good manners, Praed?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Anxious and considerate.</sd> Shall I take him away, Miss Warren? I feel sure we have disturbed you at your work.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Sit down: I’m not ready to go back to work yet. <sd>Praed sits.</sd> You both think I have an attack of nerves. Not a bit of it. But there are two subjects I want dropped, if you don’t mind. One of them <sd>to Frank</sd> is love’s young dream in any shape or form: the other <sd>to Praed</sd> is the romance and beauty of life, especially Ostend and the gaiety of Brussels. You are welcome to any illusions you may have left on these subjects: I have none. If we three are to remain friends, I must be treated as a woman of business, permanently single <sd>to Frank</sd> and permanently unromantic <sd>to Praed.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>I also shall remain permanently single until you change your mind. Praddy: change the subject. Be eloquent about something else.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Diffidently.</sd> I’m afraid theres nothing else in the world that I<i>can</i> talk about. The Gospel of Art is the only one I can preach. I know Miss Warren is a great devotee of the Gospel of Getting On; but we can’t discuss that without hurting your feelings, Frank, since you are determined not to get on.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, don’t mind my feelings. Give me some improving advice by all means: it does me ever so much good. Have another try to make a successful man of me, Viv. Come: lets have it all: energy, thrift, foresight, self-respect, character. Don’t you hate people who have no character, Viv?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Wincing.</sd> Oh, stop, stop. Let us have no more of that horrible cant. Mr. Praed: if there are really only those two gospels in the world, we had better all kill ourselves; for the same taint is in both, through and through.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Looking critically at her.</sd> There is a touch of poetry about you today, Viv, which has hitherto been lacking.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Remonstrating.</sd> My dear Frank: aren’t you a little unsympathetic?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Merciless to herself.</sd> No: it’s good for me. It keeps me from being sentimental.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Bantering her.</sd> Checks your strong natural propensity that way, don’t it?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Almost hysterically.</sd> Oh yes: go on: don’t spare me. I was sentimental for one moment in my life⁠—beautifully sentimental⁠—by moonlight; and now⁠—</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Quickly.</sd> I say, Viv: take care. Don’t give yourself away.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, do you think Mr. Praed does not know all about my mother? <sd>Turning on Praed</sd> You had better have told me that morning, Mr. Praed. You are very old fashioned in your delicacies, after all.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Surely it is you who are a little old fashioned in your prejudices, Miss Warren. I feel bound to tell you, speaking as an artist, and believing that the most intimate human relationships are far beyond and above the scope of the law, that though I know that your mother is an unmarried woman, I do not respect her the less on that account. I respect her more.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Airily.</sd> Hear! hear!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Staring at him.</sd> Is that <i>all</i> you know?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Certainly that is all.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Then you neither of you know anything. Your guesses are innocence itself compared with the truth.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Rising, startled and indignant, and preserving his politeness with an effort.</sd> I hope not. <sd>More emphatically</sd> I hope not, Miss Warren.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Whistles.</sd> Whew!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>You are not making it easy for me to tell you, Mr. Praed.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>His chivalry drooping before their conviction.</sd> If there is anything worse⁠—that is, anything else⁠—are you sure you are right to tell us, Miss Warren?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I am sure that if I had the courage I should spend the rest of my life in telling everybody⁠—stamping and branding it into them until they all felt their part in its abomination as I feel mine. There is nothing I despise more than the wicked convention that protects these things by forbidding a woman to mention them. And yet I can’t tell you. The two infamous words that describe what my mother is are ringing in my ears and struggling on my tongue; but I can’t utter them: the shame of them is too horrible for me. <sd>She buries her face in her hands. The two men, astonished, stare at one another and then at her. She raises her head again desperately and snatches a sheet of paper and a pen.</sd> Here: let me draft you a prospectus.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, she’s mad. Do you hear, Viv? mad. Come! pull yourself together.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>You shall see. <sd>She writes.</sd> “Paid up capital: not less than forty thousand pounds standing in the name of Sir George Crofts, Baronet, the chief shareholder. Premises at Brussels, Ostend, Vienna, and Budapest. Managing director: Mrs. Warren”; and now don’t let us forget <em>her</em> qualifications: the two words. <sd>She writes the words and pushes the paper to them.</sd> There! Oh no: don’t read it: don’t! <sd>She snatches it back and tears it to pieces; then seizes her head in her hands and hides her face on the table.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Frank, who has watched the writing over her shoulder, and opened his eyes very widely at it, takes a card from his pocket; scribbles the two words on it; and silently hands it to Praed, who reads it with amazement, and hides it hastily in his pocket.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Whispering tenderly.</sd> Viv, dear: thats all right. I read what you wrote: so did Praddy. We understand. And we remain, as this leaves us at present, yours ever so devotedly.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>We do indeed, Miss Warren. I declare you are the most splendidly courageous woman I ever met.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>This sentimental compliment braces Vivie. She throws it away from her with an impatient shake, and forces herself to stand up, though not without some support from the table.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Don’t stir, Viv, if you don’t want to. Take it easy.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Thank you. You an always depend on me for two things: not to cry and not to faint. <sd>She moves a few steps towards the door of the inner room, and stops close to Praed to say</sd> I shall need much more courage than that when I tell my mother that we have come to a parting of the ways. Now I must go into the next room for a moment to make myself neat again, if you don’t mind.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Shall we go away?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>No: I’ll be back presently. Only for a moment. <sd>She goes into the other room, Praed opening the door for her.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>What an amazing revelation! I’m extremely disappointed in Crofts: I am indeed.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>I’m not in the least. I feel he’s perfectly accounted for at last. But what a facer for me, Praddy! I can’t marry her now.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Sternly</sd> Frank! <sd>The two look at one another, Frank unruffled, Praed deeply indignant.</sd> Let me tell you, Gardner, that if you desert her now you will behave very despicably.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Good old Praddy! Ever chivalrous! But you mistake: it’s not the moral aspect of the case: it’s the money aspect. I really can’t bring myself to touch the old woman’s money now.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>And was that what you were going to marry on?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>What else? <i>I</i> havn’t any money, nor the smallest turn for making it. If I married Viv now she would have to support me; and I should cost her more than I am worth.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>But surely a clever bright fellow like you can make something by your own brains.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Oh yes, a little. <sd>He takes out his money again.</sd> I made all that yesterday in an hour and a half. But I made it in a highly speculative business. No, dear Praddy: even if Bessie and Georgina marry millionaires and the governor dies after cutting them off with a shilling, I shall have only four hundred a year. And he won’t die until he’s three score and ten: he hasn’t originality enough. I shall be on short allowance for the next twenty years. No short allowance for Viv, if I can help it. I withdraw gracefully and leave the field to the gilded youth of England. So that settled. I shan’t worry her about it: I’ll just send her a little note after we’re gone. She’ll understand.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Grasping his hand.</sd> Good fellow, Frank! I heartily beg your pardon. But must you never see her again?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Never see her again! Hang it all, be reasonable. I shall come along as often as possible, and be her brother. I can <i>not</i> understand the absurd consequences you romantic people expect from the most ordinary transactions. <sd>A knock at the door.</sd> I wonder who this is. Would you mind opening the door? If it’s a client it will look more respectable than if I appeared.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Certainly. <sd>He goes to the door and opens it. Frank sits down in Vivie’s chair to scribble a note.</sd> My dear Kitty: come in: come in.</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Mrs. Warren comes in, looking apprehensively around for Vivie. She has done her best to make herself matronly and dignified. The brilliant hat is replaced by a sober bonnet, and the gay blouse covered by a costly black silk mantle. She is pitiably anxious and ill at ease: evidently panic-stricken.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>To Frank.</sd> What! <em>Youre</em> here, are you?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Turning in his chair from his writing, but not rising.</sd> Here, and charmed to see you. You come like a breath of spring.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, get out with your nonsense. <sd>In a low voice</sd> Where’s Vivie?</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Frank points expressively to the door of the inner room, but says nothing.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Sitting down suddenly and almost beginning to cry.</sd> Praddy: won’t she see me, don’t you think?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>My dear Kitty: don’t distress yourself. Why should she not?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, you never can see why not: youre too innocent. Mr. Frank: did she say anything to you?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Folding his note.</sd> She <i>must</i> see you, if <sd>very expressively</sd> you wait til she comes in.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Frightened.</sd> Why shouldn’t I wait?</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Frank looks quizzically at her; puts his note carefully on the ink-bottle, so that Vivie cannot fail to find it when next she dips her pen; then rises and devotes his attention entirely to her.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>My dear Mrs. Warren: suppose you were a sparrow⁠—ever so tiny and pretty a sparrow hopping in the roadway⁠—and you saw a steam roller coming in your direction, would you wait for it?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, don’t bother me with your sparrows. What did she run away from Haslemere like that for?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>I’m afraid she’ll tell you if you rashly await her return.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>Do you want me to go away?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>No: I always want you to stay. But I <i>advise</i> you to go away.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>What! And never see her again!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Precisely.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Crying again</sd> Praddy: don’t let him be cruel to me. <sd>She hastily checks her tears and wipes her eyes.</sd> She’ll be so angry if she sees I’ve been crying.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>With a touch of real compassion in his airy tenderness.</sd> You know that Praddy is the soul of kindness, Mrs. Warren. Praddy: what do you say? Go or stay?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>To Mrs. Warren</sd> I really should be very sorry to cause you unnecessary pain; but I think perhaps you had better not wait. The fact is⁠—<sd>Vivie is heard at the inner door.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Sh! Too late. She’s coming.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>Don’t tell her I was crying. <sd>Vivie comes in. She stops gravely on seeing Mrs. Warren, who greets her with hysterical cheerfulness.</sd> Well, dearie. So here you are at last.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I am glad you have come: I want to speak to you. You said you were going, Frank, I think.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech>Yes. Will you come with me, Mrs. Warren? What do you say to a trip to Richmond, and the theatre in the evening? There is safety in Richmond. No steam roller there.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Nonsense, Frank. My mother will stay here.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Scared.</sd> I don’t know: perhaps I’d better go. We’re disturbing you at your work.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>With quiet decision</sd> Mr. Praed: please take Frank away. Sit down, mother. <sd>Mrs. Warren obeys helplessly.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Come, Frank. Goodbye, Miss Vivie.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Shaking hands.</sd> Goodbye. A pleasant trip.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech>Thank you: thank you. I hope so.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Frank</speaker>
				<speech><sd>To Mrs. Warren.</sd> Goodbye: youd ever so much better have taken my advice. <sd>He shakes hands with her. Then airily to Vivie</sd> Byebye, Viv.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Goodbye. <sd>He goes out gaily without shaking hands with her.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Praed</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Sadly.</sd> Goodbye, Kitty.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Snivelling.</sd>⁠—oobye!</speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Praed goes. Vivie, composed and extremely grave, sits down in Honoria’s chair, and waits for her mother to speak. Mrs. Warren, dreading a pause, loses no time in beginning.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>Well, Vivie, what did you go away like that for without saying a word to me! How could you do such a thing! And what have you done to poor George? I wanted him to come with me; but he shuffled out of it. I could see that he was quite afraid of you. Only fancy: he wanted me not to come. As if <sd>trembling</sd> I should be afraid of you, dearie. <sd>Vivie’s gravity deepens.</sd> But of course I told him it was all settled and comfortable between us, and that we were on the best of terms. <sd>She breaks down.</sd> Vivie: whats the meaning of this? <sd>She produces a commercial envelope, and fumbles at the enclosure with trembling fingers.</sd> I got it from the bank this morning.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>It is my month’s allowance. They sent it to me as usual the other day. I simply sent it back to be placed to your credit, and asked them to send you the lodgment receipt. In future I shall support myself.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Not daring to understand.</sd> Wasn’t it enough? Why didn’t you tell me? <sd>With a cunning gleam in her eye</sd> I’ll double it: I was intending to double it. Only let me know how much you want.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>You know very well that that has nothing to do with it. From this time I go my own way in my own business and among my own friends. And you will go yours. <sd>She rises.</sd> Goodbye.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Rising, appalled.</sd> Goodbye?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Yes: goodbye. Come: don’t let us make a useless scene: you understand perfectly well. Sir George Crofts has told me the whole business.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Angrily</sd> Silly old⁠—<sd>She swallows an epithet, and then turns white at the narrowness of her escape from uttering it.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Just so.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>He ought to have his tongue cut out. But I thought it was ended: you said you didn’t mind.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Steadfastly.</sd> Excuse me: I <i>do</i> mind.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>But I explained⁠—</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>You explained how it came about. You did not tell me that it is still going on <sd>She sits.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<sd-line>Mrs. Warren, silenced for a moment, looks forlornly at Vivie, who waits, secretly hoping that the combat is over. But the cunning expression comes back into Mrs. Warren’s face; and she bends across the table, sly and urgent, half whispering.</sd-line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>Vivie: do you know how rich I am?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I have no doubt you are very rich.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>But you don’t know all that that means; youre too young. It means a new dress every day; it means theatres and balls every night; it means having the pick of all the gentlemen in Europe at your feet; it means a lovely house and plenty of servants; it means the choicest of eating and drinking; it means everything you like, everything you want, everything you can think of. And what are you here? A mere drudge, toiling and moiling early and late for your bare living and two cheap dresses a year. Think over it. <sd>Soothingly</sd> Youre shocked, I know. I can enter into your feelings; and I think they do you credit; but trust me, nobody will blame you: you may take my word for that. I know what young girls are; and I know youll think better of it when you’ve turned it over in your mind.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>So that’s how it is done, is it? You must have said all that to many a woman, to have it so pat.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Passionately.</sd> What harm am I asking you to do? <sd>Vivie turns away contemptuously. Mrs. Warren continues desperately</sd> Vivie: listen to me: you don’t understand: you were taught wrong on purpose: you don’t know what the world is really like.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Arrested.</sd> Taught wrong on purpose! What do you mean?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>I mean that youre throwing away all your chances for nothing. You think that people are what they pretend to be: that the way you were taught at school and college to think right and proper is the way things really are. But it’s not: it’s all only a pretence, to keep the cowardly slavish common run of people quiet. Do you want to find that out, like other women, at forty, when you’ve thrown yourself away and lost your chances; or won’t you take it in good time now from your own mother, that loves you and swears to you that it’s truth: gospel truth? <sd>Urgently</sd> Vivie: the big people, the clever people, the managing people, all know it. They do as I do, and think what I think. I know plenty of them. I know them to speak to, to introduce you to, to make friends of for you. I don’t mean anything wrong: thats what you don’t understand: your head is full of ignorant ideas about me. What do the people that taught you know about life or about people like me? When did they ever meet me, or speak to me, or let anyone tell them about me? the fools! Would they ever have done anything for you if I hadn’t paid them? Havn’t I told you that I want you to be respectable? Havn’t I brought you up to be respectable? And how can you keep it up without my money and my influence and Lizzie’s friends? Can’t you see that youre cutting your own throat as well as breaking my heart in turning your back on me?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I recognize the Crofts philosophy of life, mother. I heard it all from him that day at the Gardners’.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>You think I want to force that played-out old sot on you! I don’t, Vivie: on my oath I don’t.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>It would not matter if you did: you would not succeed. <sd>Mrs. Warren winces, deeply hurt by the implied indifference towards her affectionate intention. Vivie, neither understanding this nor concerning herself about it, goes on calmly</sd> Mother: you don’t at all know the sort of person I am. I don’t object to Crofts more than to any other coarsely built man of his class. To tell you the truth, I rather admire him for being strongminded enough to enjoy himself in his own way and make plenty of money instead of living the usual shooting, hunting, dining-out, tailoring, loafing life of his set merely because all the rest do it. And I’m perfectly aware that if I’d been in the same circumstances as my aunt Liz, I’d have done exactly what she did. I don’t think I’m more prejudiced or straitlaced than you: I think I’m less. I’m certain I’m less sentimental. I know very well that fashionable morality is all a pretence, and that if I took your money and devoted the rest of my life to spending it fashionably, I might be as worthless and vicious as the silliest woman could possibly be without having a word said to me about it. But I don’t want to be worthless. I shouldn’t enjoy trotting about the park to advertize my dressmaker and carriage builder, or being bored at the opera to shew off a shopwindowful of diamonds.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Bewildered.</sd> But⁠—</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Wait a moment: I’ve not done. Tell me why you continue your business now that you are independent of it. Your sister, you told me, has left all that behind her. Why don’t you do the same?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>Oh, it’s all very easy for Liz: she likes good society, and has the air of being a lady. Imagine <i>me</i> in a cathedral town! Why, the very rooks in the trees would find me out even if I could stand the dulness of it. I must have work and excitement, or I should go melancholy mad. And what else is there for me to do? The life suits me: I’m fit for it and not for anything else. If I didn’t do it somebody else would; so I don’t do any real harm by it. And then it brings in money; and I like making money. No: it’s no use: I can’t give it up⁠—not for anybody. But what need you know about it? I’ll never mention it. I’ll keep Crofts away. I’ll not trouble you much: you see I have to be constantly running about from one place to another. Youll be quit of me altogether when I die.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>No: I am my mother’s daughter. I am like you: I must have work, and must make more money than I spend. But my work is not your work, and my way is not your way. We must part. It will not make much difference to us: instead of meeting one another for perhaps a few months in twenty years, we shall never meet: thats all.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Her voice stifled in tears.</sd> Vivie: I meant to have been more with you: I did indeed.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>It’s no use, mother: I am not to be changed by a few cheap tears and entreaties any more than you are, I daresay.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Wildly.</sd> Oh, you call a mother’s tears cheap.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>They cost you nothing; and you ask me to give you the peace and quietness of my whole life in exchange for them. What use would my company be to you if you could get it? What have we two in common that could make either of us happy together?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Lapsing recklessly into her dialect.</sd> We’re mother and daughter. I want my daughter. I’ve a right to you. Who is to care for me when I’m old? Plenty of girls have taken to me like daughters and cried at leaving me; but I let them all go because I had you to look forward to. I kept myself lonely for you. You’ve no right to turn on me now and refuse to do your duty as a daughter.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Jarred and antagonized by the echo of the slums in her mother’s voice.</sd> My duty as a daughter! I thought we should come to that presently. Now once for all, mother, you want a daughter and Frank wants a wife. I don’t want a mother; and I don’t want a husband. I have spared neither Frank nor myself in sending him about his business. Do you think I will spare you?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Violently.</sd> Oh, I know the sort you are: no mercy for yourself or anyone else. <i>I</i> know. My experience has done that for me anyhow: I can tell the pious, canting, hard, selfish woman when I meet her. Well, keep yourself to yourself: <i>I</i> don’t want you. But listen to this. Do you know what I would do with you if you were a baby again? aye, as sure as there’s a Heaven above us.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Strangle me, perhaps.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>No: I’d bring you up to be a real daughter to me, and not what you are now, with your pride and your prejudices and the college education you stole from me: yes, stole: deny it if you can: what was it but stealing? I’d bring you up in my own house, I would.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Quietly.</sd> In one of your own houses.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Screaming.</sd> Listen to her! listen to how she spits on her mother’s grey hairs! Oh, may you live to have your own daughter tear and trample on you as you have trampled on me. And you will: you will. No woman ever had luck with a mother’s curse on her.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>I wish you wouldn’t rant, mother. It only hardens me. Come: I suppose I am the only young woman you ever had in your power that you did good to. Don’t spoil it all now.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech>Yes, Heaven forgive me, it’s true; and you are the only one that ever turned on me. Oh, the injustice of it! the injustice! the injustice! I always wanted to be a good woman. I tried honest work; and I was slave-driven until I cursed the day I ever heard of honest work. I was a good mother; and because I made my daughter a good woman she turns me out as if I were a leper. Oh, if I only had my life to live over again! I’d talk to that lying clergyman in the school. From this time forth, so help me Heaven in my last hour, I’ll do wrong and nothing but wrong. And I’ll prosper on it.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>Yes: it’s better to choose your line and go through with it. If I had been you, mother, I might have done as you did; but I should not have lived one life and believed in another. You are a conventional woman at heart. That is why I am bidding you goodbye now. I am right, am I not?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Taken aback.</sd> Right to throw away all my money!</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech>No: right to get rid of you? I should be a fool not to. Isn’t that so?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Sulkily</sd> Oh well, yes, if you come to that, I suppose you are. But Lord help the world if everybody took to doing the right thing! And now I’d better go than stay where I’m not wanted. <sd>She turns to the door.</sd></speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Kindly.</sd> Won’t you shake hands?</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Mrs. Warren</speaker>
				<speech><sd>After looking at her fiercely for a moment with a savage impulse to strike her.</sd> No, thank you. Goodbye.</speech>
			</line>
			<line>
				<speaker>Vivie</speaker>
				<speech><sd>Matter-of-factly</sd> Goodbye. <sd>Mrs. Warren goes out, slamming the door behind her. The strain on Vivie’s face relaxes; her grave expression breaks up into one of joyous content; her breath goes out in a half sob, half laugh of intense relief. She goes buoyantly to her place at the writing table; pushes the electric lamp out of the way; pulls over a great sheaf of papers; and is in the act of dipping her pen in the ink when she finds Frank’s note. She opens it unconcernedly and reads it quickly, giving a little laugh at some quaint turn of expression in it.</sd> And goodbye, Frank. <sd>She tears the note up and tosses the pieces into the wastepaper basket without a second thought. Then she goes at her work with a plunge, and soon becomes absorbed in its figures.</sd></speech>
			</line>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
